python virtual env vs containerization

venv - a way to create isolated python environments. each project has its own set of dependencies without interfering with other projects or your system's global Python installation.

example:
python3 -m env myenv # creates a venv named myenv
source myenv/bin/activate # activates the venv
deactivate # exits the venv

limitation: venv only isolates python dependencies. it doesn't isolate the os, system libs, or other services

containeratization - docker packages your app and all its dependencies - including python, libs, sys tools, code, and runtime - into a standardized unit called container.

this is good because:
1. consistency - works everywhere
2. isolation - containers run in isolation from each other
3. portability - easily move and run containers on any machine
4. reproducibility - dockerfiles define exactly how your app env is built.

pip for package management
common commands:
1. pip install <package_name> - installs a package
2. pip install <package_name>==<version> - installs a specific version
3. pip install -r requirements.txt - installs all pkgs listed in a requirements.txt file
4. pip freeze > requirements.txt - generates a requirements.txt file from the currently installed pkgs in your env. (crucial for reproducibility)

docker basics
1. image - lightweight, standalone, executable pkg that includes everything needed to run a piece of software, including the code, a runtime, libraries, env variables, and config files. these are built from a Dockerfile. images are often based on other images.
2. container - a running instance of an image. containers are isolated from each other and the host system
3. dockerfile - a text file that contains instructions for building a docker image. each instruction creates a layer in the image.
4. volume - a way to persist data generated by and used by Docker containers. by default, data inside a container is lost when the container is removed. volumes allow you to map a dir on your host machine to a dir inside the container, so data persists
5. network - docker containers can communicate with each other and the outside world through networks. by default, containers can talk to each other if they are on the same docker network.

mini-project:
1. use the day 1 files and create a django project and app (without activating a venv locally)
2. create a requirements.txt file
3. write your dockerfile
4. build your docker image
5. run your docker container
6. test in your browser
7. stop the container